Hello and welcome back.
In this lecture I'd like to talk about composition over inheritance.
This is the second design principle that we're gonna discuss.
It's basically saying use a has a relationship over and is a relationship.
I know of your part familiar with these two terms because you use them a lot in Java.
But just to give you a little bit of a reminder let's talk about composition first.
So composition as I mentioned it's a has a relationship between classes to use an object going to design
one object contains or owns another object as a member variable in the class.
It's really not that simple composition implies a relationship where the child can not exist independent
of the parent.
I briefly touched on the concept of composition versus aggregation.
Those terms tend to be used interchangeably but they do have subtle differences.
And so this is again is another reminder of that difference.
Composition is independence something is part of another thing.
So for example it is not independent.
So for example wheels on an airplane right.
Wheels don't necessarily exists somewhere else beside the airplane.
You know we know that wheels could be somewhere else but they're kind of useless in the context of an
airplane.
You can't just use them by themselves.
Another example would be rooms in a house.
Each house has a room or has many rooms.
Rooms do not exist separate outside of the house so there's no independence their cells and a body would
be another example when the body object is destroyed the cells get destroyed with it they don't exist
independent of the object they're contained in when you put two classes together like this you're using
composition instead of inheriting their behavior the houses get their behavior by being composed with
the right behavior object right this has the object you're going to use that object it's its attributes
and its methods and create instances of it composition is used in many many design patterns and that's
why it's important understand the difference especially between aggregation so aggregation we talked
about again another has a relationship very closely related the composition the difference being is
the child can exist independently of the parent composition cannot exist independently aggregation can
exist independently a collection of things that are not part of it.
So for example airplanes at an airport students in a class you can get rid of the class and the students
will still exist tires on a car the tires can be taken off the car and installed on a different one
you could ask yourself the same question with wheels in an airplane right.
It depends on the context.
Wheels on an airplane could be taken off one airplane put out another plane as well but in that context
they don't exist separately when they're on an airplane.
It's all about context aggregation and composition are almost completely identical except that the composition
is used when the life of the child is completely controlled by the parent right.
So that would be in competition it has a relationship the parent is the class and then the actual child
is the object that's inside that class.
Right.
And it's not as big a deal as I mentioned previously.
When you have languages that have garbage collection like Java because you have to worry about the lifetime
of the object you have to worry about when things get deleted.
It's much more prevalent in C++.
Now this principle is all about using composition over inheritance y.
That's a good thing.
One of the reasons we want to favor object composition over class inheritance is because of encapsulation
it keeps each class encapsulated and also cohesion it focuses on one task so your classes and your class
hierarchies will remain small and we'll be less likely to grow into unmanageable monsters and we try
to avoid that we know that there are many disadvantages of having these big class hierarchies they become
unmanageable.
So we want to avoid that and competition helps us avoid that by using more of a has a relationship
inheritance breaks encapsulation because subclasses are dependent on the base class behaviour.
Right we don't have that isolation inherent it's as tightly coupled whereas composition is loosely coupled.
Again we hear those really popular terms coupling there's no dependencies so there's less dependencies
in composition versus inheritance.
And again composition also includes aggregation when behavior of Superclass changes functionality and
subclass may get broken and that's really about coupling and you didn't change a subclass at all but
now some it's broken because of that dependency.
Again a disadvantage isolation loose coupling is a big big goal job does not support multiple inheritance
composition can be a workaround to this if you really really need it most designers will say good it
doesn't support multiple inheritance multiple inheritance causes a lot of issues but again there are
times and I mentioned this before.
Some design patterns why you to use it.
Composition can work around that by having a has a relationship with many different objects.
Most design paint patterns favor composition over inheritance.
You'll notice us when we talk about the strategy and the decorator design patterns they're going to
use a has a relationship they're not going to have a class of hierarchies if design patterns use composition
then that means it has been tried and tested right.
Because again we know that sine patterns have been identified by very experienced developers and designers
and they have been used quite a bit for many many years so we know they work.
And so if they're using composition that usually means a good thing.
Composition offers better test ability of a class than when using inheritance.
We don't focus a lot on testing in this class but testing is huge unit testing in particular and you'll
notice one of the big things or one of the big advantages of using a TDD approach was this Tester and
development is the fact that when you write your test first they tend to be more loosely coupled and
they force you to write your implementation code in a more cohesive manner.
So getting your code under test is a big advantage the easier that is usually means that your code is
more well written.
And so if a code is easier to test the code is usually you're doing a good job with code and one way
of doing that is using composition.
So when you test your classes you tend to use mocking.
This is really just getting rid of the external dependencies and it's very easy to add this mock implementation
for classes that are using composition.
So again another advantage when designing using inheritance it's much harder to test because you have
to mark both the base in the subclasses because you have that coupling and you have that dependency
with subclasses and base classes.
It's always harder to test things with tightly coupled objects just because of dependencies unit testing
is one of the most important things to consider there is software development.
Again I talked about test development the importance of that.
But for those of you that are experienced out there you should understand the advantage of test ability.
A big big deal.
So composition allows for that test ability much much better.
How about software use.
How does composition inheritance relate to that.
They both promote software reuse just using different approaches so they both are doing that.
We know that software reuse is a vital vital goal.
It saves time.
It reduces obviously redundancy.
It's just a really good goal that you want to have when you implement your code.
And so one of the things though that happens is because it's so important to reuse software.
Designers tend to overuse inheritance because inheritance is one of the most basic approaches to software
reuse so they use inheritance a ton.
They have these big big class hierarchies and they become unmanageable chunks designs are often made
more reusable and simpler by depending more on object composition OK.
So it's just easier when you're doing object composition reasonable so another reason why you favor
composition over inheritance.
You don't want to use it here and it's just for the sake of code reuse which again happens a lot because
this is the only approach that most developers know.
They say I'll reuse inheritance they automatically think those two things go together.
Composition is more flexible it's more extensible when reusing existing code.
So if you're thinking reuse don't just think inheritance.
Also think composition because of the flexibility you're using an extensive military you should be able
to get all the functionality you need just by assembling existing components through object composition
you can get all that software reuse just by including the objects as member variables in your class
composition also allows for coder use from final classes you can't do that with inheritance right.
We know that the final keyword in Java eliminates subclasses says this class cannot be subclass and
so you don't have the advantage of software reuse when you have final classes.
That is not a limitation when you use composition you just still include those final objects.
So that's another advantage.
Software reuse.
I wanted to include this little tidbit about software used from head first design patterns.
It was just kind of a cool thing I came upon that I thought you can really really help with inheritance
and reuse and how it's overused and so forth.
So here's a little expert and I'll just read it through again.
You can skip through this if you're if you're bored but basically there's two there's two people talking
here the master and the student.
The master tells the student what have you learned about object oriented ways.
The student says I've learned that the promise of the object oriented way is reuse right.
Object oriented software reuse is a big deal.
Then the master says OK go ahead and continue and the student says well through inheritance all good
things may be reused.
And so we come to drastically cut development time because we don't have duplication we can swiftly
cut bamboo in the winds just like we can simply come bamboo in the woods for example the master says
okay is more time spent on code before or after development is complete student says after we always
spend more time maintaining and changing software than initial development.
And I've mentioned that many times the maintenance phase is the most expensive software lifecycle because
you're constantly maintaining fixing bugs and the product tends to be out in the real world for a number
of years 10 or 15 years.
So after is always more more time spent.
So then the master says OK.
Should the effort go into reuse above maintain stability and sex to the extent ability and the student
says Yeah I think it should.
Well you just said that maintain ability is more important.
So why now are you saying that you should more focus on reuse so the master says I can see that you
still much to learn.
I would like for you to go and meditate on inheritance further as you've seen adherence has its problems
and there are other ways of achieving reuse.
So the point in this article again is don't go crazy about reuse by by using inheritance.
It's not even the most useful thing right.
Maintain ability is more important and if it's easier to maintain reuse through composition do that
focus on maintain ability flexibility and sensibility.
Again just a little thing I wanted to share.
I thought it was interesting read and really got the point across in terms of how we tend to overuse
inheritance when we talk about software reuse So to summarize creating systems using composition gives
you a ton of flexibility.
It lets you encapsulate a family of algorithms into their own set of classes where you just include
many objects with a has a relationship as member variables.
It lets you change behaviour runtime as long as the object you're composing with implements the correct
behaviour interface you can use polymorphism and you can pass around the reference type.
We kind of saw that when we talked about programming to an interface a design based on object composition
we'll have more objects might have fewer classes but you more may have more instances of objects the
systems behaviour will depend on the interrelationships instead of being defined in one class.
So that's good to good to understand.
There are many more reasons to favour composition over inheritance.
We'll see that as we study the design patterns and detail that use composition.
You'll you'll learn all about that and see the benefits of has relationships over and is our relationship
very important.
Thank you.